
1.7. The Internet and Beyond
----------------------------



C omputers can be connected together on networks. A computer on a
network can communicate with other computers on the same network by
exchanging data and files or by sending and receiving messages.
Computers on a network can even work together on a large computation.

Today, millions of computers throughout the world are connected to a
single huge network called the Internet. New computers are being
connected to the Internet every day, both by wireless communication
and by physical connection using technologies such as DSL, cable
modems, or Ethernet.

There are elaborate protocols for communication over the Internet. A
protocol is simply a detailed specification of how communication is to
proceed. For two computers to communicate at all, they must both be
using the same protocols. The most basic protocols on the Internet are
the Internet Protocol (IP), which specifies how data is to be
physically transmitted from one computer to another, and
theTransmission Control Protocol (TCP), which ensures that data sent
using IP is received in its entirety and without error. These two
protocols, which are referred to collectively as TCP/IP, provide a
foundation for communication. Other protocols use TCP/IP to send
specific types of information such as web pages, electronic mail, and
data files.

All communication over the Internet is in the form of packets. A
packet consists of some data being sent from one computer to another,
along with addressing information that indicates where on the Internet
that data is supposed to go. Think of a packet as an envelope with an
address on the outside and a message on the inside. (The message is
the data.) The packet also includes a "return address," that is, the
address of the sender. A packet can hold only a limited amount of
data; longer messages must be divided among several packets, which are
then sent individually over the net and reassembled at their
destination.

Every computer on the Internet has an IP address, a number that
identifies it uniquely among all the computers on the net. The IP
address is used for addressing packets. A computer can only send data
to another computer on the Internet if it knows that computer's IP
address. Since people prefer to use names rather than numbers, most
computers are also identified by names, called domain names. For
example, the main computer of the Mathematics Department at Hobart and
William Smith Colleges has the domain name math.hws.edu. (Domain names
are just for convenience; your computer still needs to know IP
addresses before it can communicate. There are computers on the
Internet whose job it is to translate domain names to IP addresses.
When you use a domain name, your computer sends a message to a domain
name server to find out the corresponding IP address. Then, your
computer uses the IP address, rather than the domain name, to
communicate with the other computer.)

The Internet provides a number of services to the computers connected
to it (and, of course, to the users of those computers). These
services use TCP/IP to send various types of data over the net. Among
the most popular services are instant messaging, file sharing,
electronic mail, and the World-Wide Web. Each service has its own
protocols, which are used to control transmission of data over the
network. Each service also has some sort of user interface, which
allows the user to view, send, and receive data through the service.

For example, the email service uses a protocol known as SMTP (Simple
Mail Transfer Protocol) to transfer email messages from one computer
to another. Other protocols, such as POP and IMAP, are used to fetch
messages from an email account so that the recipient can read them. A
person who uses email, however, doesn't need to understand or even
know about these protocols. Instead, they are used behind the scenes
by computer programs to send and receive email messages. These
programs provide the user with an easy-to-use user interface to the
underlying network protocols.

The World-Wide Web is perhaps the most exciting of network services.
The World-Wide Web allows you to request pages of information that are
stored on computers all over the Internet. A Web page can contain
links to other pages on the same computer from which it was obtained
or to other computers anywhere in the world. A computer that stores
such pages of information is called aweb server. The user interface to
the Web is the type of program known as a web browser. Common web
browsers include Internet Explorer and Firefox. You use a Web browser
to request a page of information. The browser sends a request for that
page to the computer on which the page is stored, and when a response
is received from that computer, the web browser displays it to you in
a neatly formatted form. A web browser is just a user interface to the
Web. Behind the scenes, the web browser uses a protocol called HTTP
(HyperText Transfer Protocol) to send each page request and to receive
the response from the web server.




Now just what, you might be thinking, does all this have to do with
Java? In fact, Java is intimately associated with the Internet and the
World-Wide Web. As you have seen in the previous section, special Java
programs called applets are meant to be transmitted over the Internet
and displayed on Web pages. A Web server transmits a Java applet just
as it would transmit any other type of information. A Web browser that
understands Java -- that is, that includes an interpreter for the Java
Virtual Machine -- can then run the applet right on the Web page.
Since applets are programs, they can do almost anything, including
complex interaction with the user. With Java, a Web page becomes more
than just a passive display of information. It becomes anything that
programmers can imagine and implement.

But applets are only one aspect of Java's relationship with the
Internet, and not the major one. In fact, as both Java and the
Internet have matured, applets have become much less important. At the
same time, however, Java has increasingly been used to write complex,
stand-alone applications that do not depend on a Web browser. Many of
these programs are network-related. For example many of the largest
and most complex web sites use web server software that is written in
Java. Java includes excellent support for network protocols, and its
platform independence makes it possible to write network programs that
work on many different types of computer. You will learn about Java's
network support in `Chapter11`_.

Its association with the Internet is not Java's only advantage. But
many good programming languages have been invented only to be soon
forgotten. Java has had the good luck to ride on the coattails of the
Internet's immense and increasing popularity.




As Java has matured, its applications have reached far beyond the Net.
The standard version of Java already comes with support for many
technologies, such as cryptography and data compression. Free
extensions are available to support many other technologies such as
advanced sound processing and three-dimensional graphics. Complex,
high-performance systems can be developed in Java. For example,
Hadoop, a system for large scale data processing, is written in Java.
Hadoop is used by Yahoo, Facebook, and other Web sites to process the
huge amounts of data generated by their users.

Furthermore, Java is not restricted to use on traditional computers.
Java can be used to write programs for many smartphones (though not
for the iPhone). It is the primary development language for
Blackberries and Android-based phones such as the Verizon Droid.
Mobile devices such as smartphones use a version of Java called Java
ME ("Mobile Edition"). It's the same basic language as the standard
edition, but the set of classes that is included as a standard part of
the language is different. Java ME is also the programming language
for the Amazon Kindle eBook reader and for interactive features on
Blu-Ray video disks.

At this time, Java certainly ranks as one of the most widely used
programming languages. It is a good choice for almost any programming
project that is meant to run on more than one type of computing
device, and is a reasonable choice even for many programs that will
run on only one device. It is probably the most widely taught language
at Colleges and Universities. It is similar enough to other popular
languages, such as C, C++, and C#, that knowing it will give you a
good start on learning those languages as well. Overall, learning Java
is a great starting point on the road to becoming an expert
programmer. I hope you enjoy the journey!



** End of Chapter 1 **







