[ `Quiz Answers`_ | `Chapter Index`_ | `Main Index`_ ]





Quiz on Chapter 9
-----------------

T his page contains questions on Chapter 9 of ` Introduction to
Programming Using Java `_. You should be able to answer these
questions after studying that chapter. Sample answers to these
questions can be found `here`_.
Question1:
Explain what is meant by a recursive subroutine.
Question2:
Consider the following subroutine:


::

    static void printStuff(int level) {
        if (level == 0) {
           System.out.print("*");
        }
        else {
           System.out.print("[");
           printStuff(level - 1);
           System.out.print(",");
           printStuff(level - 1);
           System.out.println("]");
        }
    }


Show the output that would be produced by the subroutine
callsprintStuff(0), printStuff(1), printStuff(2), andprintStuff(3).
Question3:
Suppose that a linked list is formed from objects that belong to the
class


::

    class ListNode {
       int item;       // An item in the list.
       ListNode next;  // Pointer to next item in the list.
    }


Write a subroutine that will count the number of zeros that occur in a
given linked list of ints. The subroutine should have a parameter of
type ListNode and should return a value of type int.
Question4:
What are the three operations on a stack?
Question5:
What is the basic difference between a stack and a queue?
Question6:
What is an activation record ? What role does a stack of activation
records play in a computer?
Question7:
Suppose that a binary tree of integers is formed from objects
belonging to the class


::

    class TreeNode {
       int item;       // One item in the tree.
       TreeNode left;  // Pointer to the left subtree.
       TreeNode right; // Pointer to the right subtree.
    }


Write a recursive subroutine that will find the sum of all the nodes
in the tree. Your subroutine should have a parameter of type TreeNode,
and it should return a value of type int.
Question8:
What is a postorder traversal of a binary tree?
Question9:
Suppose that a <multilist> is defined by the BNF rule


::

    <multilist>  ::=  <word>  |  "(" [ <multilist> ]... ")"


where a <word> can be any sequence of letters. Give five different
<multilist>'s that can be generated by this rule. (This rule, by the
way, is almost the entire syntax of the programming languageLISP! LISP
is known for its simple syntax and its elegant and powerful
semantics.)
Question10:
Explain what is meant by parsing a computer program.



[ `Quiz Answers`_ | `Chapter Index`_ | `Main Index`_ ]

.. _Main Index: http://math.hws.edu/javanotes/c9/../index.html
.. _Quiz Answers: http://math.hws.edu/javanotes/c9/quiz_answers.html
.. _Chapter Index: http://math.hws.edu/javanotes/c9/index.html


