
2.5. Details of Expressions
---------------------------



T his section takes a closer look at expressions. Recall that an
expression is a piece of program code that represents or computes a
value. An expression can be a literal, a variable, a function call, or
several of these things combined with operators such as + and>. The
value of an expression can be assigned to a variable, used as a
parameter in a subroutine call, or combined with other values into a
more complicated expression. (The value can even, in some cases, be
ignored, if that's what you want to do; this is more common than you
might think.) Expressions are an essential part of programming. So
far, these notes have dealt only informally with expressions. This
section tells you the more-or-less complete story (leaving out some of
the less commonly used operators).

The basic building blocks of expressions are literals (such as
674,3.14, true, and 'X'), variables, and function calls. Recall that a
function is a subroutine that returns a value. You've already seen
some examples of functions, such as the input routines from the TextIO
class and the mathematical functions from the Math class.

The Math class also contains a couple of mathematical constants that
are useful in mathematical expressions: Math.PI represents π (the
ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter), and Math.E
represents e (the base of the natural logarithms). These "constants"
are actually member variables in Math of type double. They are only
approximations for the mathematical constants, which would require an
infinite number of digits to specify exactly.

Literals, variables, and function calls are simple expressions. More
complex expressions can be built up by using operators to combine
simpler expressions. Operators include + for adding two numbers, > for
comparing two values, and so on. When several operators appear in an
expression, there is a question of precedence, which determines how
the operators are grouped for evaluation. For example, in the
expression "A + B * C", B*C is computed first and then the result is
added to A. We say that multiplication (*) has higher precedence than
addition (+). If the default precedence is not what you want, you can
use parentheses to explicitly specify the grouping you want. For
example, you could use "(A + B) * C" if you want to add A toB first
and then multiply the result by C.

The rest of this section gives details of operators in Java. The
number of operators in Java is quite large, and I will not cover them
all here. Most of the important ones are here; a few will be covered
in later chapters as they become relevant.





2.5.1Arithmetic Operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Arithmetic operators include addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division. They are indicated by +, -, *, and/. These operations
can be used on values of any numeric type:byte, short, int, long,
float, ordouble. (They can also be used with values of type char,
which are treated as integers in this context; a char is converted
into its Unicode code number when it is used with an arithmetic
operator.) When the computer actually calculates one of these
operations, the two values that it combines must be of the same type.
If your program tells the computer to combine two values of different
types, the computer will convert one of the values from one type to
another. For example, to compute 37.4 + 10, the computer will convert
the integer 10 to a real number 10.0 and will then compute 37.4 +
10.0. This is called a type conversion. Ordinarily, you don't have to
worry about type conversion in expressions, because the computer does
it automatically.

When two numerical values are combined (after doing type conversion on
one of them, if necessary), the answer will be of the same type. If
you multiply two ints, you get an int; if you multiply twodoubles, you
get a double. This is what you would expect, but you have to be very
careful when you use the division operator /. When you divide two
integers, the answer will always be an integer; if the quotient has a
fractional part, it is discarded. For example, the value of 7/2 is 3,
not 3.5. If N is an integer variable, thenN/100 is an integer, and 1/N
is equal to zero for anyN greater than one! This fact is a common
source of programming errors. You can force the computer to compute a
real number as the answer by making one of the operands real: For
example, when the computer evaluates1.0/N, it first converts N to a
real number in order to match the type of 1.0, so you get a real
number as the answer.

Java also has an operator for computing the remainder when one integer
is divided by another. This operator is indicated by %. If A andB are
integers, then A%B represents the remainder whenA is divided by B.
(However, for negative operands, % is not quite the same as the usual
mathematical "modulus" operator, since if one of A orB is negative,
then the value of A%B will be negative.) For example, 7%2 is 1, while
34577%100 is 77, and 50%8 is 2. A common use of % is to test whether a
given integer is even or odd:N is even if N%2 is zero, and it is odd
if N%2 is 1. More generally, you can check whether an integer N is
evenly divisible by an integer M by checking whetherN%M is zero.

Finally, you might need the unary minus operator, which takes the
negative of a number. For example, -X has the same value as (-1)*X.
For completeness, Java also has a unary plus operator, as in +X, even
though it doesn't really do anything.

By the way, recall that the + operator can also be used to concatenate
a value of any type onto a String. This is another example of type
conversion. In Java, any type can be automatically converted into
typeString.





2.5.2Increment and Decrement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You'll find that adding 1 to a variable is an extremely common
operation in programming. Subtracting 1 from a variable is also pretty
common. You might perform the operation of adding 1 to a variable with
assignment statements such as:


::

    counter  =  counter + 1;
    goalsScored  =  goalsScored + 1;


The effect of the assignment statement x = x + 1 is to take the old
value of the variable x, compute the result of adding 1 to that value,
and store the answer as the new value of x. The same operation can be
accomplished by writing x++ (or, if you prefer,++x). This actually
changes the value of x, so that it has the same effect as writing
"x=x+1". The two statements above could be written


::

    counter++;
    goalsScored++;


Similarly, you could write x-- (or --x) to subtract1 from x. That is,
x-- performs the same computation as x=x-1. Adding 1 to a variable is
called incrementing that variable, and subtracting 1 is called
decrementing. The operators ++ and-- are called the increment operator
and the decrement operator, respectively. These operators can be used
on variables belonging to any of the numerical types and also on
variables of type char.

Usually, the operators ++ or -- are used in statements like "x++;" or
"x--;". These statements are commands to change the value of x.
However, it is also legal to use x++,++x, x--, or --x as expressions,
or as parts of larger expressions. That is, you can write things like:


::

    y = x++;
    y = ++x;
    TextIO.putln(--x);
    z = (++x) * (y--);


The statement "y = x++;" has the effects of adding 1 to the value of x
and, in addition, assigning some value to y. The value assigned to y
is the value of the expression x++, which is defined to be the **old**
value of x, before the1 is added. Thus, if the value of x is 6, the
statement "y = x++;" will change the value of x to7, but it will
change the value of y to 6 since the value assigned to y is the
**old** value of x. On the other hand, the value of ++x is defined to
be the **new** value of x, after the 1 is added. So if x is6, then the
statement "y = ++x;" changes the values of bothx and y to 7. The
decrement operator, --, works in a similar way.

This can be confusing. My advice is: Don't be confused. Use ++ and--
only in stand-alone statements, not in expressions. I will follow this
advice in almost all examples in these notes.





2.5.3Relational Operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Java has boolean variables and boolean-valued expressions that can be
used to express conditions that can be either true or false. One way
to form a boolean-valued expression is to compare two values using
arelational operator. Relational operators are used to test whether
two values are equal, whether one value is greater than another, and
so forth. The relational operators in Java are: ==,!=, <, >, <=, and
>=. The meanings of these operators are:


::

    A == B       Is A "equal to" B?
    A != B       Is A "not equal to" B?
    A < B        Is A "less than" B?
    A > B        Is A "greater than" B?
    A <= B       Is A "less than or equal to" B?
    A >= B       Is A "greater than or equal to" B?


These operators can be used to compare values of any of the numeric
types. They can also be used to compare values of type char. For
characters,< and > are defined according the numeric Unicode values of
the characters. (This might not always be what you want. It is not the
same as alphabetical order because all the upper case letters come
before all the lower case letters.)

When using boolean expressions, you should remember that as far as the
computer is concerned, there is nothing special about boolean values.
In the next chapter, you will see how to use them in loop and branch
statements. But you can also assign boolean-valued expressions to
boolean variables, just as you can assign numeric values to numeric
variables.

By the way, the operators == and != can be used to compare boolean
values. This is occasionally useful. For example, can you figure out
what this does:


::

    boolean sameSign;
    sameSign = ((x > 0) == (y > 0));


One thing that you **cannot** do with the relational operators<, >,
<=, and <= is to use them to compare values of type String. You can
legally use == and!= to compare Strings, but because of peculiarities
in the way objects behave, they might not give the results you want.
(The == operator checks whether two objects are stored in the same
memory location, rather than whether they contain the same value.
Occasionally, for some objects, you do want to make such a check --
but rarely for strings. I'll get back to this in a later chapter.)
Instead, you should use the subroutinesequals(), equalsIgnoreCase(),
and compareTo(), which were described in `Section2.3`_, to compare
twoStrings.





2.5.4Boolean Operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In English, complicated conditions can be formed using the words
"and", "or", and "not." For example, "If there is a test **and** you
did **not** study for it...". "And", "or", and "not" are boolean
operators, and they exist in Java as well as in English.

In Java, the boolean operator "and" is represented by &&. The &&
operator is used to combine two boolean values. The result is also a
boolean value. The result is true if **both** of the combined values
are true, and the result is false if **either** of the combined values
is false. For example, "(x==0) && (y==0)" is true if and only if both
x is equal to 0 and y is equal to0.

The boolean operator "or" is represented by ||. (That's supposed to be
two of the vertical line characters, |.) The expression "A||B" is true
if either A is true or B istrue, or if both are true. "A||B" is false
only if both A and B are false.

The operators && and || are said to beshort-circuited versions of the
boolean operators. This means that the second operand of && or || is
not necessarily evaluated. Consider the test


::

    (x != 0) && (y/x > 1)


Suppose that the value of x is in fact zero. In that case, the
division y/x is undefined mathematically. However, the computer will
never perform the division, since when the computer evaluates (x!=0),
it finds that the result is false, and so it knows that ((x!=0)&&
**anything**) has to be false. Therefore, it doesn't bother to
evaluate the second operand, (y/x>1). The evaluation has been short-
circuited and the division by zero is avoided. Without the short-
circuiting, there would have been a division by zero. (This may seem
like a technicality, and it is. But at times, it will make your
programming life a little easier.)

The boolean operator "not" is a unary operator. In Java, it is
indicated by! and is written in front of its single operand. For
example, iftest is a boolean variable, then


::

    test = ! test;


will reverse the value of test, changing it from true tofalse, or from
false to true.





2.5.5Conditional Operator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Any good programming language has some nifty little features that
aren't really necessary but that let you feel cool when you use them.
Java has the conditional operator. It's a ternary operator -- that is,
it has three operands -- and it comes in two pieces, ? and :, that
have to be used together. It takes the form


::

    
     **boolean-expression** ?  **expression1** :  **expression2**


The computer tests the value of **boolean-expression**. If the value
is true, it evaluates **expression1**; otherwise, it evaluates
**expression2**. For example:


::

    next = (N % 2 == 0) ? (N/2) : (3*N+1);


will assign the value N/2 to next if N is even (that is, if N%2==0 is
true), and it will assign the value (3*N+1) to next if N is odd. (The
parentheses in this example are not required, but they do make the
expression easier to read.)





2.5.6Assignment Operators and Type-Casts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You are already familiar with the assignment statement, which uses the
symbol "=" to assign the value of an expression to a variable. In
fact, = is really an operator in the sense that an assignment can
itself be used as an expression or as part of a more complex
expression. The value of an assignment such as A=B is the same as the
value that is assigned to A. So, if you want to assign the value of B
to A and test at the same time whether that value is zero, you could
say:


::

    if ( (A=B) == 0 )...


Usually, I would say, **don't do things like that**!

In general, the type of the expression on the right-hand side of an
assignment statement must be the same as the type of the variable on
the left-hand side. However, in some cases, the computer will
automatically convert the value computed by the expression to match
the type of the variable. Consider the list of numeric types: byte,
short,int, long, float, double. A value of a type that occurs earlier
in this list can be converted automatically to a value that occurs
later. For example:


::

    int A;
    double X;
    short B;
    A = 17;
    X = A;    // OK; A is converted to a double
    B = A;    // illegal; no automatic conversion
              //       from int to short


The idea is that conversion should only be done automatically when it
can be done without changing the semantics of the value. Any int can
be converted to a double with the same numeric value. However, there
areint values that lie outside the legal range of shorts. There is
simply no way to represent the int 100000 as a short, for example,
since the largest value of type short is 32767.

In some cases, you might want to force a conversion that wouldn't be
done automatically. For this, you can use what is called a type cast.
A type cast is indicated by putting a type name, in parentheses, in
front of the value you want to convert. For example,


::

    int A;
    short B;
    A = 17;
    B = (short)A;  // OK; A is explicitly type cast
                   //      to a value of type short


You can do type casts from any numeric type to any other numeric type.
However, you should note that you might change the numeric value of a
number by type-casting it. For example, (short)100000 is -31072. (The
-31072 is obtained by taking the 4-byte int 100000 and throwing away
two of those bytes to obtain a short -- you've lost the real
information that was in those two bytes.)

As another example of type casts, consider the problem of getting a
random integer between 1 and 6. The function Math.random() gives a
real number between 0.0 and 0.9999..., and so 6*Math.random() is
between 0.0 and 5.999.... The type-cast operator, (int), can be used
to convert this to an integer: (int)(6*Math.random()). A real number
is cast to an integer by discarding the fractional part.
Thus,(int)(6*Math.random()) is one of the integers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and
5. To get a number between 1 and 6, we can add 1:
"(int)(6*Math.random())+1". (The parentheses around 6*Math.random()
are necessary because of precedence rules; without the parentheses,
the type cast operator would apply only to the 6.)

You can also type-cast between the type char and the numeric types.
The numeric value of a char is its Unicode code number. For
example,(char)97 is 'a', and (int)'+' is 43. (However, a type
conversion from char to int is automatic and does not have to be
indicated with an explicit type cast.)

Java has several variations on the assignment operator, which exist to
save typing. For example, "A+=B" is defined to be the same as "A=A+B".
Every operator in Java that applies to two operands gives rise to a
similar assignment operator. For example:


::

    x -= y;     // same as:   x = x - y;
    x *= y;     // same as:   x = x * y;
    x /= y;     // same as:   x = x / y;
    x %= y;     // same as:   x = x % y;   (for integers x and y)
    q &&= p;    // same as:   q = q && p;  (for booleans q and p)


The combined assignment operator += even works with strings. Recall
that when the + operator is used with a string as one of the operands,
it represents concatenation. Since str += x is equivalent to
str=str+x, when += is used with a string on the left-hand side, it
appends the value on the right-hand side onto the string. For example,
if str has the value "tire", then the statement str+='d'; changes the
value ofstr to "tired".





2.5.7Type Conversion of Strings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to automatic type conversions and explicit type casts,
there are some other cases where you might want to convert a value of
one type into a value of a different type. One common example is the
conversion of a String value into some other type, such as converting
the string "10" into theint value 10 or the string "17.42e-2" into the
double value 0.1742. In Java, these conversions are handled by built-
in functions.

There is a standard class named Integer that contains several
subroutines and variables related to the int data type. (Recall that
since int is not a class, int itself can't contain any subroutines or
variables.) In particular, if str is any expression of type String,
then Integer.parseInt(str) is a function call that attempts to convert
the value of str into a value of type int. For example, the value of
Integer.parseInt("10") is the int value 10. If the parameter to
Integer.parseInt does not represent a legal int value, then an error
occurs.

Similarly, the standard class named Double includes a function
Double.parseDouble that tries to convert a parameter of typeString
into a value of type double. For example, the value of the function
call Double.parseDouble("3.14") is thedouble value 3.14. (Of course,
in practice, the parameter used inDouble.parseDouble or
Integer.parseInt would be a variable or expression rather than a
constant string.)

Type conversion functions also exist for converting strings into
enumerated type values. (Enumerated types, or enums, were introduced
in `Subsection2.3.3`_.) For any enum type, a predefined function named
valueOf is automatically defined for that type. This is a function
that takes a string as parameter and tries to convert it to a value
belonging to the enum. The valueOf function is part of the enum type,
so the name of the enum is part of the full name of the function. For
example, if an enum Suit is defined as


::

    enum Suit { SPADE, DIAMOND, CLUB, HEART }


then the name of the type conversion function would be Suit.valueOf.
The value of the function call Suit.valueOf("CLUB") would be the
enumerated type value Suit.CLUB. For the conversion to succeed, the
string must exactly match the simple name of one of the enumerated
type constants ( **without** the "Suit." in front).





2.5.8Precedence Rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you use several operators in one expression, and if you don't use
parentheses to explicitly indicate the order of evaluation, then you
have to worry about the precedence rules that determine the order of
evaluation. (Advice: don't confuse yourself or the reader of your
program; use parentheses liberally.)

Here is a listing of the operators discussed in this section, listed
in order from highest precedence (evaluated first) to lowest
precedence (evaluated last):


::

    Unary operators:              ++, --, !, unary - and +, type-cast
    Multiplication and division:  *,  /,  %
    Addition and subtraction:     +,  -
    Relational operators:         <,  >,  <=,  >=
    Equality and inequality:      ==,  !=
    Boolean and:                  &&
    Boolean or:                   ||
    Conditional operator:         ?:
    Assignment operators:         =,  +=,  -=,  *=,  /=,  %=


Operators on the same line have the same precedence. When operators of
the same precedence are strung together in the absence of parentheses,
unary operators and assignment operators are evaluated right-to-left,
while the remaining operators are evaluated left-to-right. For
example,A*B/C means (A*B)/C, while A=B=C meansA=(B=C). (Can you see
how the expression A=B=C might be useful, given that the value of B=C
as an expression is the same as the value that is assigned to B?)



